PEP 605: Change ABI management to encourage pre-built wheels (#1190)
python/peps: pep-0605.rst

* Feature freeze, ABI freeze, pyc file format freeze, and maintenance branch
  creation all correspond with the first release candidate for an X.Y.0 release
* The X.Y.0 release candidate period is extended from 3 weeks to 2 months
* The alpha and beta periods are combined into a "pre-freeze" release period,
  where a combination of alpha and beta releases share a single incrementing
  serial number (X.Y.0a1, X.Y.0b2, etc)
* The release candidates and final releases may be collectively referred to
  as "post-freeze" releases
* Pre-freeze releases from the master git branch would occur every 2 months
  whenever there is no X.Y.0 release in the release candidate phase
* Alpha releases would be "ABI breaking pre-releases", where extension modules

>   compiled against the full CPython API in an earlier pre-release may no

Author: Reworded

  remains unchanged (refer to PEP 387 for details)
* Each new pre-freeze release may introduce new deprecation warnings for
  interfaces that appeared in the previous X.Y release series
* Each new pre-freeze release may change or remove interfaces that either did
  not appear in the previous X.Y release series, or emitted a relevant
  deprecation warning in that series
* Additions to the `abi3` stable C ABI are permanent once they have been
  declared to be part of that ABI in at least one beta release
* All other newly added interfaces that have appeared only in a pre-freeze
  release are considered provisional, and may be changed in incompatible ways
  without requiring a preceding deprecation warning

As part of this change, the current "not for production use" guidance given for
beta releases would be amended to state "suitable for production use only in
environments with sufficiently robust compatibility testing and operational
monitoring capabilities".

Similarly, the guidance given for alpha releases would be amended to state
"intended for library compatibility testing and the creation of ABI compatible

> binary artifacts", rather than simply saying "not for production use".

Reviewer: I think this point is important enough to put it right near the top as well.

  load correctly.
* "beta" releases would be "binary compatible" releases, where extension modules
  built against the full CPython ABI in the preceding pre-release are expected
  to load correctly if they weren't using any provisional C APIs, or C APIs
  that were deprecated in the previous stable release series

Pre-freeze phase duration and cadence
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Rather than being released monthly for a period of a few months while preparing
a new X.Y.0 release, pre-freeze releases would instead be consistently published
every two months.

The only time this would not be the case is during the two month release
candidate period for an upcoming X.Y.0 release (see the release candidate
section below for more details).

The pre-freeze phase would typically be expected to start 2 months after the
preceding stable X.Y.0 release.

The first pre-freeze release for any new release series will always be X.Y.0a1
(as there is no preceding release with the same ABI version markers to judge
binary compatibility against).

Pre-freeze releases would gain an additional flag in their C ABI compatibility

> markers to avoid binary compatibility issues with the eventual stable release.

Reviewer: I still think this is unnecessary. The whole point of the beta builds is to be ABI compatible with the next release, so why would we mark them as incompatible?

Similarly, why would we mark alpha builds as incompatible with the compatible beta builds that follow them?

The best thing we could do here is add a version check into module initialisers with the full hex version so we can fail them quickly when a specific build has crossed an alpha release without being rebuilt. Anything else is just proving that we don't believe our own rhetoric about making compatible releases :)

Author: The point is to make them fail at the point where we cross into X.Y.0rc1, not to make them fail on any of the alpha or beta releases - users of the beta releases are on their own in that regard.

If we were to put the "recompile the world, even if you don't actually need to" gate on every alpha release, that makes the rolling stream a PITA to support even for extension modules that aren't tinkering with struct internals, while if you don't have any technically enforced rebuild gate at all, then you risk extension modules built early in the X.Y pre-release cycle causing segfaults for people that are moving directly from the previous stable release to the X.Y.0 stable release.

Author: I've added a note about this to the section on ABI management changes. It's certainly possible to leave it out, it just creates the risk of painful debugging session on the *stable* X.Y.0 release that get traced back to "Oh, our dependency 'superfast-binary-operation' was affected by a CPython ABI break in X.Y.0a5, but the project hasn't published a new build since then".

Whereas if the ABI tag changes, projects can publish a new wheel file post-rc1 without even needing to publish a new release of the project (since the ABI tags are different, the filenames are different, and hence can be added to an existing release), and if they haven't published one, users will fall back to building from source (as they do today), rather than downloading a potentially incompatible binary.

Author: I've now also incorporated the example scenario from the Discourse thread, and made it clear that a smarter scheme that allowed the use of all binaries built since that last alpha release would also be fine (I just don't know how such a scheme could actually work, given that we don't know ahead of time which alpha release is going to be the last pre-release alpha)

fast as the CPython core team is prepared to produce them.

Is it necessary to keep the "alpha" and "beta" naming scheme?
-------------------------------------------------------------

Using the "a" and "b" initials for the proposed rolling releases is a design
constraint imposed by some of the pragmatic aspects of the way CPython version
numbers are published.

Specifically, alpha releases, beta releases, and release candidates are reported
in some places using the strings "a", "b", and "c" respectively, while in others
they're reported using the hex digits ``0xA``, ``0xB``, and ``0xC``. We want to
preserve that, while also ensuring that any ``Python-Requires`` constraints
are expressed against the beta releases rather than the alpha releases (since
the latter may not enforce the ``abi3`` stability requirements if two alpha
releases occur in succession).

However, there isn't anything forcing us to say that the "a" stands for "alpha"
or the "b" stands for "beta".

That means that if we wanted to increase adoption amongst folks that were
only being put off by the "beta" label, then it may make sense to emphasise

> the "ABI breaking" and "binary compatible" names over the "alpha" and "beta"

Reviewer: 👏 Nice

Maybe emphasise the initials of the two names to make the a/b clearer?

```suggestion
the "*A*BI breaking" and "*B*inary compatible" names over the "alpha" and "beta"
```

names, giving:

* 3.9.0a1: ABI breaking pre-freeze release
* 3.9.0b2: binary compatible pre-freeze release
* 3.9.0rc1: release candidate
* 3.9.0: final release

That said, limiting initial adoption to folks that are comfortable with the
"beta" label may be a good thing, as early adopters of the rolling pre-freeze
releases are likely to encounter unexpected consequences at the level of the
wider Python ecosystem, and would need to take an active part in getting those

> issues resolved.

Reviewer: Maybe we could reframe this as "our expectation is that it will take time to build trust in the new labels, and so slower adoption of the pre-freeze releases due to lingering fears around the names is a good thing" rather than it being treated as "OMG nobody will use it because it says 'beta'"?

Author: Exactly - the *first* time we do this, we want to limit the audience to folks that are willing to be active participants in making it work in the real world.

If that proves feasible, then the second and subsequent times are when it makes sense to start removing incidental barriers to adoption (while still making it clear it isn't going to be suitable for everyone)

Implications for Python library development
-------------------------------------------

If this PEP is successful in its aims, then supporting the rolling pre-freeze
release stream shouldn't be subtantially more painful for library authors than
supporting the stable releases.

For publishers of pure Python packages, this would be a matter of publishing

> unversioned wheel archives, and potentially adding the rolling pre-freeze

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"py3" tagged wheel archives, and potentially adding the rolling pre-freeze
```
